Know What You Can Control And What You Can't
--------------------------------------------

Happiness and freedom begin with a clear understanding of one principle: Some
things are within our control, and some things are not. It is only after you
have faced up to this fundamental rule and learned to distinguish between what
you can and can't control that inner tranquility and outer effectiveness become
possible.

Within our control are our own opinions, aspirations, desires, and the things
that repel us. These areas are quite rightly our concern, because they are
directly subject to our influence. We always have a choice about the contents
and character of our inner lives.

Outside our control, however, are such things as what kind of body we have,
whether we're born into wealth or strike it rich, how we are regarded by others,
and our status in society. We must remember that those things are externals and
are therefore not our concern. Trying to control or to change what we can't only
results in torment.

Remember: The things within our power are naturally at our disposal, free from
any restraint or hindrance; but those things outside our power are weak,
dependent, or determined by the whims and actions of others. Remember, too, that
if you think that you have free rein over things that are naturally beyond your
control, or if you attempt to adopt the affairs of others as your won, your
pursuits will be thwarted and you will become a frustrated, anxious, and fault-
finding person.
%
Stick With Your Own Business
----------------------------

Keep your attention focused entirely on what is truly your own concern, and be
clear that what belongs to others is their business and none of yours. If you do
this, you will be impervious to coercion and no one can ever hold you back. You
will be truly free and effective, for your efforts will be put to good use and
won't be foolishly squandered finding fault with or opposing others.

In knowing and attending to what actually concerns you, you cannot be made to do
anything against your will; others can't hurt you, you don't incur enemies or
suffer harm.

If you aim to live by such principles, remember that it won't be easy: you must
give up some things entirely; and postpone others for now. You may well have to
forego wealth and power if you want to assure the attainment of happiness and
freedom.
%
Recognize Appearances For What They Really Are
----------------------------------------------

From now on, practice saying to everything that appears unpleasant: "You are
just an appearance and by no means what you appear to be." And then thoroughly
consider the matter according to the principles just discussed, primarily: Does
this appearance concern the things that are within my own control or those that
are not? If it concerns anything outside your control, train yourself not to
worry about it.
%
Desire Demands Its Own Attainment
---------------------------------

Our desires and aversions are mercurial rulers. They demand to be pleased.
Desire commands us to run off and get what we want. Aversion insists that we
must avoid the things that repel us.

Typically when we don't get what we want, we are disappointed, and when we get
what we don't want, we are distressed.

If, then, you avoid only those undesirable things that are contrary to your
natural well-being and are within your control, you won't ever incur anything
you truly don't want. However, if you try to avoid inevitabilities such as
sickness, death, or misfortune, over which you have no real control, you will
make yourself and others around you suffer.

Desire and aversion, though powerful, are but habits. And we can train ourselves
to have better habits. Restrain the habit of being repelled by all those things
that aren't within your control, and focus instead on combating things within
your power that are not good for you.

Do your best to rein in your desire. For if you desire something that isn't
within your own control, disappointment will surely follow; meanwhile, you will
be neglecting the very things that are within your control that are worthy of
desire.

Of course, there are times when for practical reasons you must go after one
thing or shun another, but do so with grace, finesse, and flexibility.
%
See Things For What They Are
----------------------------

Circumstances do not rise to meet our expectations. Events happen as they do.
People behave as they are. Embrace what you actually get.

Open your eyes: See things for what they really are, thereby sparing yourself
the pain of false attachments and avoidable devastation.

Think about what delights you—the tools on which you depend, the people whom you
cherish. But remember that they have their own distinct character, which is
quite a separate matter from how we happen to regard them.

As an exercise, consider the smallest things to which you are attached. For
instance, suppose you have a favorite cup. It is, after all, merely a cup; so if
it should break, you could cope. Next build up to things—or people— toward which
your clinging feelings and thoughts intensify.

Remember, for example, when you embrace your child, your husband, your wife, you
are embracing a mortal. Thus, if one of them should die, you could bear it with
tranquility.

When something happens, the only thing in your power is your attitude toward it;
you can either accept it or resent it.

What really frightens and dismays us is not external events themselves, but the
way in which we think about them. It is not things that disturb us, but our
interpretation of their significance.

Stop scaring yourself with impetuous notions, with your reactive impressions of
the way things are!

Things and people are not what we wish them to be nor what they seem to be. They
are what they are.
%
Harmonize Your Actions With The Way Life Is
-------------------------------------------

Don't try to make your own rules.

Conduct yourself in all matters, grand and public or small and domestic, in
accordance with the laws of nature. Harmonizing your will with nature should be
your utmost ideal.

Where do you practice this ideal? In the particulars of your own daily life with
its uniquely personal tasks and duties. When you carry out your tasks, such as
taking a bath, do so—to the best of your ability—in harmony with nature. When
you eat do so—to the best of your ability—in harmony with nature, and so on.

It is not so much what are are doing as how you are doing it. When we properly
understand and live by this principles, while difficulties will arise—for they
are part of the divine order too—inner peace will still be possible.
%
Events Don't Hurt Us, But Our Views Of Them Can
-----------------------------------------------

Things themselves don't hurt or hinder us. Nor do other people. How we view
these things is another matter. It is our attitudes and reactions that give us
trouble.

Therefore even death is no big deal in and of itself. It is our notion of death,
our idea that it is terrible, that terrifies us. There are so many different
ways to think about death. Scrutinize your notions about death — and everything
else. Are they really true? Are they doing you any good? Don't dread death or
pain; dread the fear of death or pain.

We cannot choose our external circumstances, but we can always choose how we
respond to them.
%
No Shame, No Blame
------------------

If it is our feelings about things that torment us rather than the things
themselves, it follows that blaming others is silly. Therefore, when we suffer
setbacks, disturbances, or grief, let us never place the blame on others, but on
our own attitudes.

Small-minded people habitually reproach others for their own misfortunes.
Average people reproach themselves. Those are are dedicated to a life of wisdom
understand that the impulse to blame something or someone is foolishness, that
there is nothing to be gained in blaming, whether it be others or oneself.

One of the signs of the dawning of moral progress is the gradual extinguishing
of blame. We see the futility of finger-pointing. The more we examine our
attitudes and work on ourselves, the less we are apt to be swept away by stormy
emotion reactions in which we seek easy explanations for unbidden events.

Things simply are what they are. Other people think what they will think; it is
of no concern to us. No Shame. No Blame.
%
Create Your Own Merit
---------------------

Never depend on the admiration of others. There is no strength in it. Personal
merit cannot be derived from an external source. It is not to be found in your
personal associations, not can it be found in the regard of other people. It is
a fact of life that other people, even people who love you, will not necessarily
agree with your ideas, understand you, or share your enthusiasms. Grow up! Who
cares what other people think about you!

Create your own merit.

Personal merit cannot be achieved through our associations with people of
excellence. You have been given your own work to do. Get to it right now, do
your best at it, and don't be concerned with who is watching you.

Do your own useful work without regard to the honor or admiration your efforts
might win from others. There is no such thing as vicarious merit.

Other people's triumphs an excellences belong to them. Likewise, your
possessions may have excellence, but you yourself don't derive excellence from
them.

Think about it What is really your own? The use you make of the ideas,
resources, and opportunities that come your way. Do you have books? Read them.
Learn from them. Apply their wisdom. Do you have specialized knowledge? Put it
to its full and good use. Do you have tools? Get the out and build or repair
things with them. Do you have a good idea? Follow up and follow through on it
Make the most of what you've got, what is actually yours.

You can be justifiably happy with yourself and at ease when you've harmonized
your actions with nature by recognizing what truly is your own.
%
Focus On Your Main Duty
-----------------------

There is a time and place for diversion and amusements, but you should never
allow them to override your true purposes. If you were on a voyage and the ship
anchored in a harbor, you might go ashore for water and happen to pick up a
shellfish or a plant. But be careful; listen for the call of the captain. Keep
your attention directed at the ship. Getting distracted by trifles is the
easiest thing in the world. Should the captain call, you must be ready to leave
those distractions and come running, without even looking back.

If you are old, do not go far from the ship, or you might fail to appear when
you are called for.
%
Accept Events As They Occur
---------------------------

Don't demand or expect that events happen as you would wish them to. Accept
events as they actually happen. That way peace is possible.
%
Your Will Is Always Within Your Power
-------------------------------------

Nothing truly stops you. Nothing truly holds you back. For your own will is
aways your control.

Sickness may challenge your body. But are you merely your body? Lameness may
impede your legs. But you are not merely your legs. Your will is bigger than
your legs.

Your will needn't be affected by an incident unless you let it. Remember this
with everything that happens to you.
%
Make Full Use Of What Happens To You
------------------------------------

Every difficulty in life presents us with an opportunity to turn inward and to
invoke our own submerged inner resources. The trials we endure can and should
introduce us to our strengths.

Prudent people look beyond the incident itself and seek to form the habit of
putting it to good use.

On the occasion of an accidental event, don't just react in a haphazard fashion:
Remember to turn inward and ask what resources you have for dealing with it. Dig
deeply. You possess strengths you might not realize you have. Find the right
one. Use it.

If you encounter an attractive person, then self-restraint is the resource
needed; if pain or weakness, then stamina; if verbal abuse, then patience.

As time goes by and you build on the habit of matching the appropriate inner
resource to each incident, you will not tend to get carried away by life's
appearances. You will stop feeling overwhelmed so much of the time.
%
Care For What You Happen To Have
--------------------------------

Nothing can truly be taken from us. There is nothing to lose. Inner peace begins
when we stop saying of things, "I have lost it" and instead say, "It has been
returned to where it came from." Have your children died? They are returned to
where they came from. Has your mate died? Your mate is returned to where he or
she came from. Have your possessions and property been taken from you? They too
have been returned to where they came from.

Perhaps you are vexed because a bad person took your belongings. But why should
it be any concern of yours who gives your things back to the world that gave
them to you?

The important thing is to take great care with what you have while the world
lest you have it, just as a traveler takes care of a room at an inn.
%
The Good Life Is The Life Of Inner Serenity
-------------------------------------------

The surest sign of the higher life is serenity. Moral progress results in freeom
from inner turmoil. You can stop fretting about this and that.

If you seek the higher life, refrain from such common patterns of thinking as
these: "If I don't work harder, I'll never earn a decent living, no one will
recognize me, I'll be a nobody," or "If I don't criticize my employee, he'll
take advantage of my good will."

It's much better to die of hunger unhindered by grief and fear than to live
affluently beset with worry, dread, suspicion, and unchecked desire.

Begin at once a program of self-mastery. But start modestly, with the little
things that bother you. Has you child spilled something? Have you misplaced your
wallet? Say to yourself, "Coping calmly with this inconvenience is the price I
pay for my inner serenity, for freedom from perturbation; you don't get
something for nothing."

When you call your child, be prepared that she may not respond to you, or if she
does, she might not do what you want her to do. Under these circumstances, it
doesn't help your child for you to become agitated. It should not be in her
power to cause you any disturbance.
%
Disregard What Doesn't Concern You
----------------------------------

Spiritual progress requires us to highlight what is essential and to disregard
everything else as trivial pursuits unworthy of our attention. Moreover, it is
actually a good thing to be thought foolish and simple with regard to matters
that don't concern us. Don't be concerned with other people's impressions of
you. They are dazzled and deluded by appearances. Stick with your purpose. This
alone will strengthen your will and give your life coherence.

Refrain from trying to win other people's approval and admiration. You are
taking a higher road. Don't long for others to see you as sophisticated, unique,
or wise. In fact, be suspicious if you appear to others as someone special. Be
on your guard against false sense of self-importance.

Keeping your will in harmony with truth and concerning yourself with what is
beyond your control are mutually exclusive. While you are absorbed in one, you
will neglect the other.
%
Conform Your Wishes To Reality
------------------------------

For good or for ill, life and nature are governed by laws that we can't change.
The quicker we accept this, the more tranquil we can be. You would be foolish to
wish that your children or your spouse would live forever. They are mortal, just
as you are, and the law of mortality is completely out of your hands.

Similarly, it is foolish to wish that an employee, relative, or friend be
without fault. This is wishing to control things that you can't truly control.

It is within our control not to be disappointed by our desires if we deal with
them according to facts rather than by being swept away by them.

We are ultimately controlled by that which bestows what we seek or removes what
we don't want. If it's freedom you seek, then wish nothing and shun nothing that
depends on others, or you will always be a helpless slave.

Understand what freedom really is and how it is achieved. Freedom isn't the
right or ability to do whatever you please. Freedom comes from understanding the
limits of our power and the natural limits set in place by divine providence. By
accepting life's limits and inevitabilities and working with them rather than
fighting them, we become free. If, on the other hand, we succumb to our passing
desires for things that aren't in our control, freedom is lost.
%
Approach Life As A Banquet
--------------------------

Think of your life as if it were a banquet where you would behave graciously.
WHen dishes are passed to you, extend your hand and help yourself to a moderate
portion. If a dish should pass you by, enjoy what is already on your plate. Or
if the dish hasn't been passed to you yet, patiently wait your turn.

Carry over this same attitude of polite restraint and gratitude to your
children, spouse, career, and finances. There is not need to yearn, envy, and
grab. You will get your rightful portion when it is your time.

Diogenes and Heraclitus were impeccable models of living by such principles
rather than by raw impulses. Make it your quest to imitate their worthy example.
%
Avoid Adopting Other People'S Negative Views
--------------------------------------------

Other people's views and troubles can be contagious. Don't sabotage yourself by
unwittingly adopting negative, unproductive attitudes through your associations
with others.

If you encounter a downhearted friend, a grieving parent, or a colleague who has
suffered a sudden reversal of fortune, be careful not to be overcome yourself by
the apparent misfortune. Remember to discriminate between events themselves and
your interpretations of them. Remind yourself: "What hurts this person is not
the occurrence itself, for anther person might not feel oppressed by this
situation at all. What is hurting this person is the response he or she has
uncritically adopted."

It is not a demonstration of kindness or friendship to the people we care about
to join them in indulging in wrongheaded, negative feelings. We do a better
service to ourselves and others by remaining detached and avoiding melodramatic
reactions.

Still, if you find yourself in a conversation with someone who is depressed,
hurt, or frustrated, show them kindness and give them a sympathetic ear; just
don't allow yourself to be pulled down too.
%
Act Well The Part That Is Given To You
--------------------------------------

We are like actors in a play. The divine will has assigned us our roles in life
without consulting us. Some of us will act in a short drama, others in a long
one. We might be assigned the part of a poor person, a cripple, a distinguished
celebrity or public leader, or an ordinary private citizen.

Although we can't control which roles are assigned to us, it must be our
business to act our given role as best as we possibly can and to refrain from
complaining about it. Wherever you find yourself and in whatever circumstances,
give an impeccable performance.

If you are supposed to be a reader, read; if you are supposed to be a writer,
write.
%
Everything Happens For A Good Reason
------------------------------------

As you think, so you become. Avoid superstitiously investing events with power
or meanings they don't have. Keep your head. Our busy minds are forever jumping
to conclusions, manufacturing and interpreting signs that aren't there.

Assume, instead, that everything that happens to you does so for some good. That
if you decided to be lucky, you are lucky. All events contain an advantage for
you—if you look for it!
%
Happiness Can Only Be Found Within
----------------------------------

Freedom is the only worthy goal in life. It is won by disregarding things that
lie beyond our control. We cannot have a light heart if our minds are a woeful
cauldron of fear and ambition.

Do you wish to be invincible? Then don't enter into combat with what you have no
real control over. Your happiness depends on three things, all of which are
within your power: your will, your ideas concerning the events in which you are
involved, and the use you make of your ideas.

Authentic happiness is always independent of external conditions. Vigilantly
practice indifference to external conditions. Your happiness can only be found
within.

How easily dazzled and deceived we are by eloquence, job title, degrees, high
honors, fancy possessions, expensive clothing or a suave demeanor. Don't make
the mistake of assuming that celebrities, public figures, political leaders, the
wealthy, or people with great intellectual or artistic gifts are necessarily
happy. To do so is to be bewildered by appearances and will only make you doubt
yourself.

Remember: The real essence of good is found only within things under your own
control. If you keep this in mind, you won't find yourself feeling falsely
envious or forlorn, pitifully comparing yourself and your accomplishments to
others.

Stop aspiring to be anyone other than your own best self: for that does fall
within your control.
%
No One Can Hurt You
-------------------

People don't have the power to hurt you. Even if someone shouts abuse at you or
strikes you, if you are insulted, it is always your choice to view what is
happening as an insulting or not. If someone irritates you, it is only your own
response that is irritating you. Therefore, when anyone seems to be provoking
you, remember that it is only your judgement of the incident that provokes you.
Don't let your emotions get ignited by mere appearances.

Try not to merely react in the moment. Pull back from the situation. Take a
wider view; compose yourself.
%
Spiritual Progress Is Made Through Confronting Death And Calamity
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Instead of averting your eyes from the painful events of life, look at them
squarely and contemplate them often. By facing the realities of death,
infirmity, loss, and disappointment, you free yourself of illusions and false
hopes and you avoid miserable, envious thoughts.
%
Implant In Yourself The Ideals You Ought To Cherish
---------------------------------------------------

Attach yourself to what is spiritually superior, regardless of what other people
think or do. Hold to your true aspirations no matter what is going on around
you.
%
The Pursuit Of Wisdom Attracts Critics
--------------------------------------

Those who pursue the higher life of wisdom, who seek to live by spiritual
principles, must be prepared to be laughed at and condemned.

Many people who have progressively lowered their personal standards in an
attempt to win social acceptance and life's comforts bitterly resent those of
philosophical bent who refuse to compromise their spiritual ideals and seek to
better themselves. Never live your life in reaction to these diminishes souls.
Be compassionate toward them, and at the same time hold to what you know is
good.

When you begin your program of spiritual progress, chances are the people
closest to you will deride you or accuse you of arrogance.

It is your job to comport yourself humbly and to consistently hew to your moral
ideals. Cling to what you know in your heart is best. Then, if you are
steadfast, the very people who ridiculed you will come to admire you.

If you allow the mean-spirited opinions of others to make you waver in your
purpose, you incur a double shame.

Seeking to please is a perilous trap

In trying to please other people, we find ourselves misdirected toward what lies
outside our sphere of influence. In doing so we lose our hold on our life's
purpose.

Content yourself with being a lover of wisdom, a seeker of the truth. Return and
return again to what is essential and worthy.

Do not try to seem wise to others.

If you want to live a wise life, live it on your own terms and in your own eyes.
%
Character Matters More Than Reputation
--------------------------------------

Worry and dread are a waste of time and do not set a good example for others.
This is especially true regarding your reputation and influence. Why live in
fear about things such as whether you will gain public recognition in your
profession or community? Or whether you will get the opportunities and
perquisites that others do?

Don't be bothered by such concerns as "People don't think well of me," and "I'm
nobody." Even if you reputation were really to matter, you're not responsible
for what others think of you. What real difference does it make to your
character and well-being if you have a powerful position or get invited to fancy
parties? None at all. So how is there any discredit in not being a power broker
or a celebrity? And why should you worry about being a nobody when what matters
is being a somebody in those areas of your life over which you have control and
in which you can make a real difference?

"But without power and repute I won't be able to help my friends," you might say.
It's true that you won't give them access to money or the halls of power. But
who really expects that such assistance is yours to give and not for others to
provide? Who can be expected to give anything that they don't have? "Still, it
would be great to have money and power and to be able to share them with my
friends." If I can get rich and powerful while preserving my own honor,
faithfulness to family, friends, principles, and self-respect, show me how and
I'll do it. But if I have to sacrifice my personal integrity, it's stupid and
silly to urge me on. Besides, if you had to choose between having a certain
amount of money and having a loyal and honorable friend, which would you
choose? It's better if you help me become a good person than to push me to do
things that threaten my good character.

"Well, what about my obligations to my country?" What do you mean? If you are
talking about making grand charitable donations or putting up fancy buildings,
is that really an issue? A metalworker doesn't make shoes, and a shoemaker
doesn't make weapons. It is enough if everyone does well what he or she is
supposed to do. "Well, what if someone else were to do the same thing as me?"
That's fine. It doesn't make your contribution any less valuable. "But what
about my position in society?" you ask. Whatever position you can hold while
preserving your honor and your fidelity to your obligations is fine. But if
your desire to contribute to society compromises your moral responsibility how
can you serve your fellow cities when you've become irresponsible and
shameless?

It's better to be a good person and fulfill your obligations that to have renown
and power.
%
All Advantages Have Their Price
-------------------------------

Is someone enjoying the privileges, opportunities, or honor you desire? If the
advantages that person has secured are good, then delight in that person
enjoying them. It is his or her time to prosper. If those advantages actually
turn out to be bad, then don't be troubled that they didn't come your way.

Remember: You will never earn the same rewards as others without employing the
same methods and investment of time as they do. It is unreasonable to think we
can earn rewards without being willing to pay their true price. Those who "win"
at something have no real advantage over you, because they had to pay the price
for the reward.

It is always our choice whether or not we wish to pay the price for life's
rewards. And often it is best for us not to pay the price, for the price might
be our integrity. We could be forced to praise someone whom we don't respect.
%
Make The Will Of Nature Your Own
--------------------------------

Learn the will of nature. Study it, pay attention to it, and then make it your
own.

The will of nature is revealed to us through everyday experiences common to all
people. For example, if a neighbor's child breaks a bowl, or some similar thing,
we readily say, "These things happen." When your own bowl breaks, you should
respond in the same way as when another person's bowl breaks.

Carry this understanding over to matters of greater emotional import and worldly
consequence. Has the child or spouse or other dear one of another person died?
Under such circumstances, there is no one who would not say, "Such is the cycle
of life. Death happens. Some things are inevitable."

But if our own child or dearly beloved dies, we tend to cry out, "Woe is me! How
miserable I am!"

Remember how you feel when you hear the same thing concerning other people.
Transfer that feeling to your own current circumstances. Learn to accept events,
even death, with intelligence.
%
Self-Mastery Is Our True Aim
----------------------------

Evil does not naturally dwell in the world, in events, or in people. Evil is a
by-product of forgetfulness, laziness, or distraction: it arises when we lose
sight of our true aim in life.

When we remember that our aim is spiritual progress, we return to striving to be
our best selves. This is how happiness is won.
%
Treasure Your Mind, Cherish Your Reason, Hold To Your Purpose
-------------------------------------------------------------

Don't surrender your mind.

If someone were to casually give your body away to any old passerby, you would
naturally be furious.

Why then do you feel no shame in giving your precious mind over to any person
who might wish to influence you? Think twice before you give up your own mind to
someone who may revile you, leaving you confused and upset.
%
Consider What Comes First, Then What Follows, And Then Act
----------------------------------------------------------

Cultivate the habit of surveying and testing a prospective action before
undertaking it. Before you proceed, step back and look at the big picture, lest
you act rashly on raw impulse. Determine what happens first, consider what that
leads to, and then act in accordance with what you've learned.

When we act without circumspection, we might begin a task with great enthusiasm;
then, when unforeseen or unwanted consequences follow, we shamefully retreat and
are filled with regret: "I should have done it differently."

Suppose you wanted to be victorious at the Olympic Games. That's fine, but fully
consider what you're getting yourself into. What does such a desire entail? What
needs to happen first? Then what? What will be required of you? And what else
follows from that? Is this whole course of action really beneficial to you? If
so, carry on.

If you wish to win at the Olympic Games, to prepare yourself properly you would
have to follow a strict regimen that stretches you to the limits of your
endurance. You would have to submit to demanding rules, follow a suitable diet,
vigorously exercise at a regular time in both heat and cold, and give up
drinking. You would have to follow the directions of your trainer as if he or
she were your doctor. Then, once you are actually in competition, there's a good
change you'd be hurled into a ditch. You might injure your arm, sprain your
ankle, get your face slammed in the mud; and after going through all this, you
might still be defeated.

After you have contemplated all these possibilities—mindful of all the things
that might happen and their consequences— and if your resolve is still strong,
then exercise your judgement. If the overall picture still seems beneficial,
then do enter the Games—wholeheartedly.

By considering the big picture, you distinguish yourself from the mere dabbler,
the person who plays at things as long as they feel comfortable or interesting.
This is not noble. Think things through and fully commit! Otherwise, you will be
like a child who sometimes pretends he or she is a wrestler, sometimes a
solider, sometimes a musician, sometimes an actor in a tragedy.

Unless we fully give ourselves over to our endeavors, we are hollow, superficial
people and we never develop our natural gifts. We've all know people who, like
monkeys, mimic whatever seems novel and flashy at the moment. But then their
enthusiasm and efforts wane; they drop their projects as soon as they become too
familiar or demanding.

A half-hearted spirit has no power. Tentative efforts lead to tentative
outcomes. Average people enter into their endeavors headlong and without care.
Perhaps they meet with an exemplary figure like Euphrates and become inspired to
excel themselves. It is all well and good to do this, but consider first the
real nature of your aspirations, and measure that against your capacities.

Be honest with yourself. Clearly assess your strengths and weaknesses. Do you
have what it takes to compete at this time? To be a wrestler, for instance,
requires extraordinary strength in one's shoulders, back, and thighs. Do you
have the physical prowess and agility to be among the best in the sport? It is
one thing to wish to be a champion or to do something skillfully; it is another
to actually do it and to do it with consummate skill. Different people are made
for different things.

Just as certain capacities are required for success in a particular area, so too
are certain sacrifices required. If you wish to become proficient in the art of
living with wisdom, do you think you can eat and drink to excess? Do you think
you can continue to succumb to anger and your usual habits of frustration and
unhappiness? No. If true wisdom is your object and you are sincere, you will
have work to do on yourself. You will have to overcome many unhealthy cravings
and knee-jerk reactions. You will have to reconsider whom you associate with.
Are your friends and associates worthy people? Does their influence—their
habits, values, and behavior—elevate you or reinforce the slovenly habits from
which you seek escape? The life of wisdom, like anything else, demands its
price. You may, in following it, be ridiculed and even end up with the worst of
everything in all parts of your public life, including your career, your social
standing, and your legal position in the courts.

Once you have given due consideration to all of the constituent details that
compose the effort to live the higher life, venture forth with your utmost
effort. Make the necessary sacrifices that are the price for the worthiest
goals: freedom, even-mindedness, and tranquility. If, however, upon honestly
appraising your mettle, you are not fit or ready, free yourself from delusion
and tread a different, more realistic road.

If you try to be something you're not or strive for something completely beyond
your present capacities, you end up as a pathetic dabbler, trying first to be a
wise person, then a bureaucrat, then a politician, then a civic leader. These
roles are not consistent. You can't be flying off in countless directions,
however appealing they are, and at the same time live an integrated, fruitful
life.

You can only be one person—either a good person or a bad person. You have two
essential choices. Either you can set yourself to developing your reason,
cleaving to truth, or you can hanker after externals. The choice is yours and
yours alone. You can either put your skills toward internal work or lose
yourself to externals, which is to say, be a person of wisdom or follow the
common ways of mediocre.
%
Our Duties Are Revealed By Our Relations With One Another Beholden: Owing Thanks
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
or having a duty to someone in return for help or a service

You are not an isolated entity, but a unique, irreplaceable part of the cosmos.
Don't forget this. You are an essential piece of the puzzle of humanity. Each of
us is a part of a vast, intricate, and perfectly ordered human community. But
where do you fit into this web of humanity? To whom are you beholden?

Look for and come to understand your connections to other people. We properly
locate ourselves within the cosmic scheme by recognizing our natural relations
to one another and thereby identifying our duties. Our duties naturally emerge
from such fundamental relations as our families, neighborhoods, workplaces, our
state or nation. Makes it your regular habit to consider your roles—parent,
child, neighbor, citizen, leader—and the natural duties that arise from them.
Once you know who you are and to whom you are linked, you will know what to do.

If a man is your rather, for instance, certain emotional and practical claims
follow from this. That he is your father implies a fundamental, durable link
between the two of you. You are naturally obligated to care for him, to listen
to his advice, to exercise patience in hearing his views, and to respect his
guidance.

However, let us suppose that he's not a good father. Perhaps he is fatuous,
uneducated, unrefined, or holds views quite different from your own. Does nature
give everyone an ideal father, or simply a father? When it comes to your
fundamental duty as a son or daughter, whatever your father's character may be,
whatever his personality or habits are, is secondary. The divine order does not
design people or circumstance according to our tastes. Whether you find him to
be agreeable or not, this man is, when all is said and done, your father, and
you should live up to all your filial obligations.

Suppose you have a brother or sister who treats you poorly. What difference does
it make? There is still a moral imperative to recognize and maintain your
fundamental duty to him or her. Focus not on what he or she does, but on keeping
to your higher purpose. Your own purpose should seek harmony with nature itself.
For this is the true road to freedom. Let others behave as they will—that is not
within your control anyway, and thus it's of no concern to you. Understand that
nature as a whole is ordered according to reason, but that not everything in
nature is reasonable.

When you are faithfully occupied with performing the acts of a wise and decent
person, seeking to conform your intentions and acts to the divine will, you do
not feel victimized by the words or deeds of others. At worst, those words and
deeds seem amusing or pitiable.

Except for extreme physical abuse, other people cannot hurt you unless you allow
them to. And this holds true even if the person is your parent, brother, sister,
teacher, or employer. Don't consent to be hurt and you won't be hurt—this is a
choice over which you have control.

Most people tend to delude themselves into thinking that freedom comes from
doing what feels good or what fosters comfort and ease. The truth is that people
who subordinate reason to their feelings of the moment are actually slaves of
their desires and aversions. They are ill-prepared to act effectively and nobly
when unexpected challenges occur, as they inevitably will.

Authentic freedom places demands on us. In discovering and comprehending our
fundamental relations to one another and zestfully performing our duties, true
freedom, which all people long for, is indeed possible.
%
The Essence Of Faithfulness
---------------------------

The essence of faithfulness lies first in holding correct opinions and attitudes
regarding the Ultimate. Remember that the divine order is intelligent and
fundamentally good. Life is not a series of random, meaningless episodes, but an
ordered, elegant whole that follows ultimately comprehensible laws.

The divine will exists and directs the universe with justice and goodness.
Though it is not always apparent if you merely look at the surface of things,
the universe we inhabit is the best possible universe.

Fix your resolve on expecting justice and goodness and order, and they will
increasingly reveal themselves to you in all your affairs. Trust that there is a
divine intelligence whose intentions direct the universe. Make it your utmost
goal to steer your life in accordance with the will of divine order.

When you strive to conform your intentions and actions with the divine order,
you don't feel persecuted, helpless, confused, or resentful toward the
circumstances of your life. You will feel strong, purposeful, and sure.

Faithfulness is not blind belief; it consists of steadfastly practicing the
principle of shunning those things which are not within your control, leaving
them to be worked out according to the natural system of responsibilities. Cease
trying to anticipate or control events. Instead accept them with grace and
intelligence.

It is impossible to remain faithful to your ordained purpose if you drift into
imagining that those things outside your power are inherently good or evil. When
this happens the habit of blaming outside factors for our lot in life inevitably
sets in, and we lose ourselves in a negative spiral of envy, strife,
disappointment, anger, and reproach. For by nature all creatures recoil from the
things they think would do them harm and seek out and admire those things that
seem good and helpful.

The second aspect of faithfulness is the importance of prudently observing the
customs of your family, your country, and local community. Perform your
community's rituals with a pure heart, without greed or extravagance. In doing
so, you join the spiritual order of your people and further the ultimate
aspirations of humanity.

Faithfulness is the antidote to bitterness and confusion. It confers the
conviction that we are ready for anything the divine will intends for us. Your
aim should be to view the world as an integrated whole, to faithfully incline
your whole being toward the highest good, and to adopt the will of nature as
your own.
%
Events Are Impersonal And Indifferent
-------------------------------------

When considering the future, remember that all situations unfold as they do
regardless of how we feel about them. Our hopes and fears sway up, not events
themselves.

Undisciplined people, driven by their personal antipathies and sympathies, are
forever on the lookout for signs that build up or reinforce their unexamined
views and opinions. Events themselves are impersonal, though judicious people
certainly can and should respond to them in beneficial ways.

Instead of personalizing an event ("This is my triumph," "This was his blunder,"
or "this is my bitter misfortune") and drawing withering conclusions about
yourself or human nature, watch for how you can put certain aspects of the event
to good use. Is there some less-than-obvious benefit embedded in the event that
a trained eye might discern? Pay attention; be a sleuth. Perhaps there is a
lesson you can extract and apply to similar events in the future.

In any events, however seemingly dire, there is nothing to prevent us from
searching for its hidden opportunity. It is a failure of the imagination not to
do so. But to seek out the opportunity in situations requires a great deal of
courage, for most people around you will persist in interpreting events in the
grossest terms: success or failure, good or bad, right or wrong. These
simplistic, polarized categories obscure more creative—and
useful—interpretations of events that are far more advantageous and interesting!

The wise person knows it is fruitless to project hopes and fears on the future.
This only leads to forming melodramatic representations in your mind and wasting
time.

At the same time, one shouldn't passively acquiesce to the future and what it
holds. Simply doing nothing does not avoid risk, but heightens it.

There is a place for prudent planning and for making provision for situations to
come. Proper preparation for the future consists of forming good personal
habits. This is done by actively pursuing the good in all the particulars of
your daily life and by regularly examining your motives to make sure they are
free of the shackles of fear, greed, and laziness. If you do this, you won't be
buffeted about by outside events.

Train your intentions rather than fooling yourself into thinking you can
manipulate outside events. If you are helped by praying or meditating, by all
means do so. But seek divine counsel when the application of your own reason
hasn't yielded any answers, when you have exhausted other means.

What is a "good" event? What is a "bad" event? There is no such thing! What is a
good person? The one who achieves tranquility by having formed the habit of
asking on every occasion, "What is the right thing to do now?"
%
Never Suppress A Generous Impulse
---------------------------------

Follow through on all your generous impulses. Do not question them, especially
if a friend needs you; act on his or her behalf. Do not hesitate!

Don't sit around speculating about the possible inconvenience, problems, or
dangers. As long as you let your reason lead the way, you will be safe.

It is our duty to stand by our friends in their hour of need.
%
Clearly Define The Person You Want To Be
----------------------------------------

Who exactly do you want to be? What kind of person do you want to be? What are
your personal ideals? Whom do you admire? What are their special traits that you
would make your own?

It's time to stop being vague. If you wish to be an extraordinary person, if you
wish to be wise, then you should explicitly identify the kind of person you
aspire to become. If you have a daybook, write down who you're trying to be, so
that you can refer to this self-definition. Precisely describe the demeanor you
want to adopt so that you may preserve it when you are by yourself or with other
people.
%
Speak Only With Good Purpose
----------------------------

So much attention is given to the moral importance of our deeds and their
effects. Those who seek to live the higher life also come to understand the oft-
ignored moral power of our words.

One of the clearest marks of the moral life is right speech. Perfecting our
speech is one of the keystones of an authentic spiritual program. First and
foremost, think before you speak to make sure you are speaking with good
purpose. Glib talk disrespects others. Breezy self-disclosure disrespects
yourself. So many people feel compelled to give voice to any passing feeling,
thought, or impression they have. They randomly dump the contents of their minds
without regard to the consequences. This is practically and morally dangerous.
if we babble about every idea that occurs to us—big and small—we can easily
fritter away in the trivial currents of mindless talk ideas that have true
merit. Unchecked speech is like a vehicle wildly lurching out of control and
destined for a ditch.

If need be, be mostly silent or speak sparingly. Speech itself is neither good
nor evil, but it is so commonly used carelessly that you need to be on your
guard. Frivolous talk is hurtful talk; besides, it is unbecoming to be a
chatterbox.

Enter into discussions when social or professional occasion calls for it, but be
cautious that the spirit and intent of the discussion and its content remain
worthy. Prattle is seductive. Stay out of its clutches.

It's not necessary to restrict yourself to loft subjects or philosophy all the
time, but be aware that the common babbling that passes for worthwhile
discussion has a corrosive effect on your higher purpose. When we blather about
trivial things, we ourselves become trivial, for our attention gets taken up
with trivialities. You become what you give your attention to.

We become small-minded if we engage in discussion about other people. In
particular, avoid blaming, praising, or comparing people.

Try whenever possible, if you notice the conversation around you decaying into
palaver, to see if you can subtly lead the conversation back to more
constructive subjects. If, however, you find yourself among indifferent
strangers, you can simply remain silent.

Be of good humor and enjoy a good laugh when it is apt, but avoid the kind of
unrestrained barroom laughter that easily degenerates into vulgarity or
malevolence. Laugh with, but never laugh at.

If you can, avoid making idle promises whenever possible.
%
Avoid Most Popular Entertainment
--------------------------------

Most of what passes for legitimate entertainment is inferior or foolish and only
caters to or exploits people's weaknesses. Avoid being one of the mob who
indulges in such pastimes. Your life is too short and you have important things
to do. Be discriminating about what images and ideas you permit into your mind.
If you yourself don't choose what thoughts and images you expose yourself to,
someone else will, and their motives may not be the highest. It is the easiest
thing in the world to slide imperceptibly into vulgarity. But there's no need
for that to happen if you determine not to waste your time and attention on
mindless pap.
%
Be Careful Of About The Company You Keep
----------------------------------------

Regardless of what others profess, they may not truly live by spiritual values.
Be careful whom you associate with. It is human to imitate the habits of those
with whom we interact. We inadvertently adopt their interests, their opinions,
their values, and their habit of interpreting events. Though many people mean
well, they can just the same have a deleterious influence on you because they
are undisciplined about what is worthy and what isn't.

Just because some people are nice to you doesn't mean you should spend time with
them. Just because they seek you out and are interested in you or your affairs
doesn't mean you should associate with them. Be selective about whom you take on
as friends, colleagues, and neighbors. All of these people can affect your
destiny. They world is full of agreeable talented folk. The key is to keep
company only with people who uplift you, whose presence calls forth your best.
But remember that our moral influence is a two-way street, and we should thus
make sure by our own thoughts, words, and deeds to be a positive influence on
those we deal with. The real test of personal excellence lies in the attention
we give to the often neglected small details of our conduct.

Regularly ask yourself, "How are my thoughts, words, and deeds affecting my
friends, my spouse, my neighbor, my child, my employer, my subordinates, my
fellow citizens? Am I doing my part to contribute to the spiritual progress of
all with whom I come in contact?" Make it your business to draw out the best in
others by being an exemplar yourself.
%
Take Care Of Your Body
----------------------

Respect your body's needs. Give your body excellent care to promote its health
and well-being. Give it everything it absolutely requires, including healthy
food and drink, dignified clothing, and a warm and comfortable home. Do not,
however, use your body as occasion for show or luxury.
%
Avoid Casual Sex
----------------

Abstain from casual sex and particularly avoid sexual intercourse before you get
married. This may sound prudish or old-fashioned, but it is a time-tested way by
which we demonstrate respect for ourselves and others. Sex is not a game. It
gives rise to very real enduring emotional and practical consequences. To ignore
this is to debase yourself, and to disregard the significance of human
relationships.

If, however, you know someone who has had casual sex, don't self-righteously try
to win them over to your own views.

An active sex life within a framework of personal commitment augments the
integrity of the people involved and is part of a flourishing life.
%
Don't Defend Your Reputation Or Intentions
------------------------------------------

Don't be afraid of verbal abuse or criticism.

Only the morally weak feel compelled to defend or explain themselves to others.
Let the quality of your deeds speak on your behalf. We can't control the
impressions others form about us, and the effort to do so only debases our
character.

So, if anyone should tell you that a particular person has spoken critically of
you, don't bother with excuses or defenses. Just smile and reply, "I guess that
person doesn't know about all my other faults. Otherwise, he wouldn't have
mentioned only these."
%
Conduct Yourself With Dignity
-----------------------------

No matter where you find yourself, comport yourself as if you were a
distinguished person.

While the behavior of many people is dictated by what is going on around them,
hold yourself to a higher standard. Take care to avoid parties or games where
thoughtless revelry and carousing are the norm. If you find yourself at a public
event, remain rooted in your own purposes and ideals.
%
Emulate Worthy Role Models
--------------------------

One of the best ways to elevate your character immediately is to find worthy
role models to emulate. If you have the opportunity to meet an important person,
don't be nervous. Invoke the characteristics of the people you admire most and
adopt their manners, speech, and behavior as your own. There is nothing false in
this. We all carry the seeds of greatness within us, but we need an image as a
point of focus in order that they may sprout.

At the same time, just because you are meeting a person of great merit doesn't
mean you should be overly awed. People are just people, regardless of their
talent or influence.
%
Exercise Discretion When Conversing
-----------------------------------

Self-importance is not the way of the true philosopher. Nobody enjoys the
company of a braggart. Don't oppress people with dramatic stores of your own
exploits. Nobody cares that much about your war stores and dramatic adventures,
though they might indulge you for a while to appear polite. To speak frequently
and excessively of your own achievements is tiresome and pompous.
%
Prefer Enduring Satisfaction To Immediate Gratification
-------------------------------------------------------

Let your reason be supreme.

Inculcate the habit of deliberation.

Practice the art of testing whether particular things are actually good or not.
Learn to wait and assess instead of always reacting from untrained instinct.
Spontaneity is not a virtue in and of itself.

If some pleasure is promised to you and it seductively calls to you, step back
and give yourself some time before mindlessly jumping at it. Dispassionately
turn the matter over in your mind: Will this pleasure bring momentary delight,
or real, lasting satisfaction? It makes a difference in the quality of our life
and the kind of person we will become when we learn how to distinguish between
cheap thrills and meaningful, lasting rewards.

If, in calmly considering this pleasure, you realize that if you indulge in it
you will regret it, abstain and rejoice in your forbearance. Reinforce the
triumph of your character and you will be strengthened.
%
Take A Stand
------------

Once you have deliberated and determined that a course of action is wise, never
discredit your judgement. Stand squarely behind your decision. Chances are there
may indeed be people who misunderstand your intentions and who may even condemn
you. But if, according to you best judgement, you are acting rightly, you have
nothing to fear. Take a stand. Don't be cravenly noncommittal.
%
Courtesy And Logic Each Have Their Place
----------------------------------------

Propriety and logic are different things, and each has its appropriate
application.

The proposition "Either it is day or it is night" works well in a disjunctive
argument, but not as well in a friendly conversation. Likewise, at a banquet it
may make sense to take the largest share of food if you are really hungry, but
it would be bad manners to do so.

When you dine with others, be aware not only how much your body appreciates the
delicacies offered, but also how important good manners and personal refinement
are.
%
Self-Mastery Depends On Self-Honesty
------------------------------------

Know first who you are and what you're capable of. Just as nothing great is
created instantly, the same goes for the perfecting of our talents and
aptitudes. We are always learning, always growing. It is right to accept
challenges. This is how we progress to the next level of intellectual, physical,
or moral development. Still, don't kid yourself: If you try to be something or
someone you are not, you belittle your true self and end up not developing in
those areas that you would have excelled at quite naturally.

Within the divine order, we each have our own special calling. Listen to yours
and follow it faithfully.
%
Safeguard Your Reason
---------------------

Just as when you walk you are careful not to step on a nail or injure your foot,
you should similarly take the utmost care not to in any way impair the highest
faculty of your mind. The virtuous life depends on reason first and foremost. If
you safeguard your reason, it will safeguard you.
%
Observe Proper Proportion And Moderation
----------------------------------------

Through vigilance, we can forestall the tendency to excess. Your possessions
should be proportionate to the needs of your body, just as the shoe should fit
the foot.

Without moral training, we can be induced to excess. In the case of shoes, for
instance, many people are tempted to buy fancy, exotic shoes when all that is
needed is comfortable, well-fitting, durable footwear.

Once we fall, however slightly, into immoderation, momentum gathers and we can
be lost to whim.
%
Inner Excellence Matters More Than Outer Appearance
---------------------------------------------------

Females are especially burdened by the attention they receive for their pleasing
appearance. From the time they are young, they are flattered by males or
evaluated only in terms of their own outward appearance.

Unfortunately, this can make a woman feel suited only to give men pleasure, and
her true inner gifts sadly atrophy. She may feel compelled to put great effort
and time into enhancing her outer beauty and distorting her natural self to
please others.

Sadly, many people—both men and women—place all their emphasis on managing their
physical appearance and the impression they make on others.

Those who seek wisdom come to understand that even though the world may reward
us for wrong or superficial reasons, such as our physical appearance, the family
we come from, and so on, what really matters is who we are inside and who we are
becoming.
%
Care About Your Mind More Than Your Body
----------------------------------------

Those who are morally untrained spend an inordinate amount of time on their
bodies. Carry out your animal functions incidentally. Your main attention should
be given to the care and development of your reason. For through reason, you are
able to understand nature's laws.
%
Mistreatment Comes From False Impressions
-----------------------------------------

If people treat you disrespectfully or speak unkindly about you, remember that
they do so from their impression that it is right to do so.

It is unrealistic to expect people to see you as you see yourself. If people
reach conclusions based on false impressions, they are the ones hurt rather than
you, because it is they who are misguided. When someone interprets a true
proposition as a false one, the proposition itself isn't hurt; only the person
who holds the wrong view is deceived, and thus damaged. Once you clearly
understand this, you will be less likely to feel affronted by others, even if
they revile you. You can say to yourself, "It seemed so to that person, but that
is only his impression."
%
Everything Has Two Handles
--------------------------

Everything has two handles: one by which it may be carried, the other by which
it can't.

If, for example, your brother or sister treats you poorly, don't grasp the
situation by the handle of hurt or injustice, or you won't be able to bear it
and you will become bitter. Do the opposite. Grasp the situation by the handle
of familial ties. In other words, focus on the fact that this is your brother or
sister, that you were brought up together, and thus have an enduring,
unbreakable bond. Viewing the situation that way, you understand it correctly
and preserve the equilibrium.
%
Clear Thinking Is Vital
-----------------------

The life of wisdom is a life of reason. It is important to learn how to think
clearly. Clear thinking is not a haphazard enterprise. It requires proper
training. It is through clear thinking that we are able to properly direct our
will, stick with our true purpose, and discover the connections we have to
others and the duties that follow from those relationships. Every person should
learn how to identify mushy and fallacious thinking. Study how inferences are
legitimately derived, so that you avoid drawing unfounded conclusions.

For instance, not the flowing examples of faulty logic: "I am richer than you;
therefore I am better than you." One encounters such absurd assertions as this
all the time, but they are completely fallacious. The valid inference that can
be drawn is this: "I am richer than you; therefore I have more possessions or
money than you do."

Another example: "I speak more persuasively than you; therefore, I am better
than you." From this we can conclude, "I speak more persuasively than you;
therefore my speech carries more effect than yours."

But remember: Your character is independent of property or persuasive speech.

Take the time to assiduously study clear thinking and you won't be hoodwinked.
Strong education in logic and the rules of effective argument will serve you
well.
%
Call Things By Their Right Names
--------------------------------

When we name things correctly, we comprehend them correctly, without adding
information or judgements that aren't there. Does someone bathe quickly? Don't
say he bathes poorly, but quickly. Name the situation as it is; don't filter it
through your judgements.

Does someone drink a lot of wine? Don't say she is a drunk but that she drinks a
lot. Unless you possess a comprehensive understanding of her life, how do you
know if she is a drunk?

Do not risk being beguiled by appearances and constructing theories and
interpretations based on distortions through misnaming. Give your assent only to
what is actually true.
%
Wisdom Is Revealed Through Action, Not Talk
-------------------------------------------

Don't declare yourself to be a wise person or discuss your spiritual aspirations
with people who won't appreciate them. Show your character and your commitment
to personal nobility through your actions.
%
Live Simply For Your Own Sake
-----------------------------

Don't be puffed up with pride if you are able to provide for your needs with
very little cost. The first task of the person who wishes to live wisely is to
free himself or herself from the confines of self-absorption.

Consider how much more frugal the poor are than we, how much better they
forebear hardship. If you want to develop your ability to live simply, do it for
yourself, do it quietly, and don't do it to impress others.
%
Wisdom Depends On Vigilance
---------------------------

Most people don't realize that both help and harm come from within ourselves.
Instead they look to externals, mesmerized by appearances.

Wise people, on the other hand, realize that we are the source of everything
good or pad for us. They therefore don't resort to blaming and accusing others.
They aren't driven to convince people they are worthy or special or
distinguished.

If wise people experience challenges, they look to themselves; if they are
commended by others, they quietly smile to themselves, unmoved; if they are
slandered, they don't feel the need to defend their name.

But they go about their actions with vigilance, assuming that all is well, yet
not perfectly secure. They harmonize their desires with life as it is, and seek
to avoid only the things that would prevent their ability to exercise their will
properly. They exercise moderation in all their affairs. And if they seem
ignorant or unsophisticated, it is of no concern to them.They know that they
only have to watch out for themselves and the direction of their own desires.
%
Living Wisdom Is More Important Than Knowing About It
-----------------------------------------------------

If someone tries to impress you, claiming to understand the writings or ideas of
a great thinker such as Chrysippus, think to yourself, the important thing is
not to be able merely to speak fluently about abstruse subjects. What is
essential is to understand nature and align your intentions and actions with the
way things are. The person who truly understands Chrysippus's writings or the
precepts of any great mind is the person who actually applies the philosopher's
teachings. There is a big difference between saying valuable things and doing
valuable things.

Don't give too much weight to erudition alone. Look to the example of people
whose actions are consistent with their professed principles.
%
Practicing Principles Matters More Than Proving Them
----------------------------------------------------

The life of wisdom begins with learning how to put principles, such as "We ought
not to lie," into practice. The second step is to demonstrate the truth of the
principles, such as why it is that we ought not to lie. The third step, which
connects the first two, is to indicate why the explanations suffice to justify
the principles. While the second and third steps are valuable, it is the first
step that matters most. For it is all too easy and common to lie while cleverly
demonstrating that lying is wrong.
%
Start Living Your Ideals
------------------------

Now is the time to get serious about living your ideals. Once you have
determined the spiritual principles you wish to exemplify, abide by these as if
they were laws, as if it were indeed sinful to compromise them.

Don't mind if others don't share your convictions. How long can you afford to
put off who you really want to be? Your nobler self cannot wait any longer.

Put your principles into practice—now. Stop the excuses and the procrastination.
This is your life! You aren't a child anymore. The sooner you set yourself to
your spiritual program, the happier you will be. The longer you wait, the more
you will be vulnerable to mediocrity and feel filled with shame and regret,
because you know you are capable of better.

From this instant on, vow to stop disappointing yourself. Separate yourself from
the mob. Decide to be extraordinary and do what you need to do — now.
%
The Soul'S Cry
--------------

Philosophy's main task is to respond to the soul's cry; to make sense of and
thereby free ourselves from the hold of our griefs and fears.

Philosophy calls us when we've reached the end of our rope. The insistent
feeling that something is not right with our lives and the longing to be
restored to our better selves will not go away. Our fears of death and being
alone, our confusion about love and sex, and our sense of impotence in the face
of our anger and outsized ambitions bring us to ask our first sincere
philosophical questions.

It's true: there is no obviously apparent meaning to our lives. Cruelty,
injustice, bodily discomfort, illness, annoyances, and inconveniences big and
small are the prosaic facts of any day. So what do we do about this? How do
we—in spite of the pain and suffering in the outside world and our own wayward
emotions—live ennobled lives rather than succumbing to a despairing numbness and
merely coping like a mule with tedium and unbidden responsibilities.

When the soul cries out, it is a sign that we have arrived at a necessary,
mature stage of self-reflection. The secret is not to get stuck there dithering
or wringing your hands, but to move forward by resolving to heal yourself.
Philosophy asks us to move into courage. Its remedy is the unblinking excavation
of the faulty and specious premises on which we base our lives and our personal
identity.
%
The Real Purpose Of Philosophy
------------------------------

True philosophy doesn't involve exotic rituals, mysterious liturgy, or quaint
beliefs. Nor is it just abstract theorizing and analysis. It is, of course, the
love of wisdom. It is the art of living a good life. As such, it must be rescued
from religious gurus and from professional philosophers lest it be exploited as
an esoteric cult or as a set of detached intellectual techniques or brain
teasers to show how clever you are. Philosophy is intended for everyone, and it
is authentically practiced only by those who wed it with action in the world
toward a better life for all.

Philosophy's purpose is to illuminate the ways our soul has been infected by
unsound beliefs, untrained tumultuous desires, and dubious life choices and
preferences that are unworthy of us. Self-scrutiny applied with kindness is the
main antidote. Besides rooting out the soul's corruptions, the life of wisdom is
also meant to stir us from our lassitude and move us in the direction of an
energetic, cheerful life.

Skilled use of logic, disputation, and the developed ability to name things
correctly are some of the instruments philosophy gives us to achieve abiding
clear-sightedness and inner tranquility, which is true happiness.

This happiness, which is our aim, must be correctly understood. Happiness is
commonly mistaken for passively experienced pleasure or leisure. That conception
of happiness is good only as far as it goes. The only worthy object of all our
efforts is a flourishing life.

True happiness is a verb. It's the ongoing dynamic performance of worthy deeds.
The flourishing life, whose foundation is virtuous intention, is something we
continually improvise, and in doing so our souls mature. Our life has usefulness
to ourselves and to the people we touch.

We become philosophers to discover what is really true and what is merely the
accidental result of flawed reasoning, recklessly acquired erroneous judgments,
well-intentioned but misguided teachings of parents and teachers, and unexamined
acculturation. 

To ease our soul's suffering, we engage in disciplined introspection in which we
condut thought-experiments to strengthen our ability to distinguish between
wholesome and lazy, hurtful beliefs and habits.
%
The First Step
--------------

The first step to living wisely is to relinquish self-conceit.

See the delusional folly in being a nervous know-it-all whose giddy mind is
always prattling on about its knee-jerk impressions of events and other people,
forcing current experiences into previously formed categories: "Oh yes, this
thing here is just like such and such."

Behold the world fresh—as it is, on its own terms—through the eyes of a
beginner. To know that you do not know and to be willing to admit that you do
not know without sheepishly apologizing is real strength and sets the stage for
learning and progress in any endeavor.

The wisest among us appreciate the natural limits of our knowledge and have the
mettle to preserve their naiveté. They understand how little all of us really
know about anything. There is no such thing as conclusive, once-and-for-all
knowledge. The wise do not confuse information or data, however prodigious or
cleverly deployed, with comprehensive knowledge or transcendent wisdom. They say
things like "Hmmm" or "Is that so!" a lot. Once you realize how little we do
know, you are not so easily duped by fast-talkers, splashy gladhanders, and
demagogues. Spirited curiosity is an emblem of the flourishing life.

Arrogance is the banal mask for cowardice; but far more important, it is the
most potent impediment to the flourishing life. Clear thinking and self-
importance cannot logically coexist. Humanity has no inherent pecking order,
despite outward appearances. Everyone in this world is important. If you really
want peace of mind and success in your endeavors, forego self-importance.

Conceit is an iron gate that admits no new knowledge, no expansive
possibilities, nor constructive ideas. Indulging in excessive pride in your own
knowledge, abilities, or experiences and attempting to take on more power or
authority than is your due is fatal. Such preening not only alienates others,
since an overbearing lout is suffocating to be around, but also leads to
complacency, precluding change in a wholesome direction. You keep running around
in the same familiar circles; you get caught in the same sticky webs. Nothing
novel or festive every happens.

To do anything well you must have the humility to bumble around a bit, to follow
your nose, to get lost, to goof. Have the courage to try an undertaking and
possibly do it poorly Unremarkable lives are marked by fear of not looking
capable when trying something new.

New experiences are meant to deepen our lives and advance us to new levels of
competence; they are not meant to be used by the self-important as fodder for
shoring up their previously adopted views and conclusions.

Important knowledge and personal guidance dwell in unexpected places. If you
wish to see them and avail yourself of them when you come upon them, then guard
yourself lest you become vainglorious and uncritically smug.

The legitimate glow of satisfaction at accomplishing a hard-won worthy goal
should not be confused with arrogance, which is characterized by self-
preoccupation and lack of interest in the feelings or affairs of others.
%
The Flourishing Life Depends On Self-Sufficiency
------------------------------------------------

The flourishing life is not achieved by techniques. You can't trick yourself
into a life well-lived. Neither is it achieved by following five easy steps or
some charismatic figure's dogma. A flourishing life depends on our responding,
as best we can, to those things uniquely incumbent on us.

To live an extraordinary life means we must elevate our moral stature by
culturing our character. The untrained brood about the constituent elements of
their lives. They waste precious time in regret or wishing their particulars
were different ("If only I lived in a better house or town, had a different
spouse, a more glamorous job, more time to myself…"). The morally trained,
rather than resenting or dodging their current life situations and duties, give
thanks for them and fully immerse themselves in their duties to their family,
friends, neighbors, and job. When we succumb to whining, we diminish our
possibilities.

The overvaluation of money, status, and competition poisons our personal
relations. The flourishing life cannot be achieved until we moderate our desires
and see how superficial and fleeting they are.
%
Starting Out Is Hard
--------------------

The first steps toward wisdom are the most strenuous, because our weak and
stubborn souls dread exertion (without absolute guarantee of reward) and the
unfamiliar. As you progress in your efforts, your resolve is fortified and self-
improvement progressively comes easier. By and by it actually becomes difficult
to work counter to your won best interest.

By the steady but patient commitment to removing unsound beliefs from our souls,
we become increasingly adept at seeing through our flimsy fears, our
bewilderment in love, and our lack of self control. We stop trying to look good
to others. One day, we contentedly realize we've stopped playing to the crowd.
%
Good Is Good
------------

Goodness exists independently of our conception of it. The good is out there and
it always has been out there, even before we began to exist.
%
Be Suspicious Of Convention
---------------------------

Be suspicious of convention.

Take charge of your own thinking.

Rouse yourself from the daze of unexamined habit.

Popular perceptions, values, and ways of doing things are rarely the wisest.
Many pervasive beliefs would not pass appropriate test of rationality.
Conventional thinking—its means and ends—is essentially uncreative and
uninteresting. Its job is to preserve the status quo for overly self-defended
individuals and institutions. 

On the other hand, there is no inherent virtue in new ideas. Judge ideas and
opportunities on the basis of whether the are life-giving. Give your assent to
that which promotes humaneness, justice, beneficial growth, kindness,
possibility, and benefit to the human community.

Examine things as they appear to your own mind; objectively consider what is
said by others, and then establish your own convictions.

Socially taught beliefs are frequently unreliable. So many of our beliefs have
been acquired through accident and irresponsible or ignorant teaching. Many of
these beliefs are so deeply ingrained that they are hidden from our own view.
The commonplace sluggishness of the lives lived by the undisciplined is
dangerously contagious, for we are often exposed to no alternative healthful way
of living. Awaken and be vigilant. Take stock of your habits to preserve your
higher standards.

Many people declare with all sincerity that they are committed to their own
integrity, while engaging in thoughtless or intemperate actions. They proceed
willy-nilly, undercutting their otherwise well-intentioned efforts by failing to
face themselves and to articulate a coherent personal moral code to which their
future actions would conform. Don't listen to what people say. Watch what they
do and evaluate the attendant consequences.

Just as we must clean, order, and maintain our homes to move forward with
anything; we need to do the same with our minds. For not only do we risk
inefficiency by failing to do so, we invite our soul's very corruption. A
disorganized, foggy soul is dangerous, for it is vulnerable to the influence of
better organized but unsavory influences.

Trust nothing and nobody but yourself. Be ceaselessly watchful over you beliefs
and impulses.
%
The Virtuous Are Invincible
---------------------------

The difference between the instructed and the ignorant is that the wise know
that the virtuous are invincible. They aren't tricked and provoked by the way
things appear to be.

The instructed respect the kinship we share with the Ultimate and thus comport
themselves as a compassionate, self-aware citizen of the universe. They
understand that the wise life, which leads to tranquility, comes from conforming
to Nature and to Reason.
%
Be A Citizen Of The World
-------------------------

One cannot pursue one's own highest good without at the same time necessarily
promoting the good of others. A life based on narrow self-interest cannot be
esteemed by any honorable measurement. Seeking the very best in ourselves means
actively caring for the welfare of other human beings. Our human contract is not
with the few people with whom our affairs are most immediately intertwined, nor
to the prominent, rich, or well educated, but to all our human brethren.

View yourself as a citizen of a worldwide community and act accordingly.
%
Consider Your Deepest Yearnings Merely As Facts
-----------------------------------------------

Consider your deepest and most secret yearnings as if they were merely facts, so
you can see ho insubstantial and hysterical they are. There is no shame in
pursuing worldly success: It's normal. Your trouble lies not in the pursuit
itself, but how you pursue it. You allow your frenzied, misguided desires and
fears to color your judgement. So you overevaltuate the intrinsic worth of your
pursuits. You bank on your pursuits to give you happiness, thus confusing means
with ends.

Understand that while the pursuit of such indifferent objectives is natural,
neither failure nor success in attaining them has the slightest bearing on your
happiness.
%
The Right Use Of Books
----------------------

Don't just say you have read books. Show that through them you have learned to
think better, to be a more discriminating and reflective person. Books are the
training weights of the mind. They are very helpful, but would be a bad mistake
to suppose that one has made progress simply by having internalized their
contents.
%
Exercise Caution When Mingling With Others
------------------------------------------

One of two things will happen when you socialize with others. You either become
like your companions, or you bring them over to your own ways. Just as when a
dead coal contacts a live one, either the first will extinguish the last, or the
last kindle the first. Great is the danger; so be circumspect on entering into
personal associations, even and especially light-hearted ones.

Most of us do not possess sufficiently developed steadfastness to steer our
companions to our own purpose, so we end up being carried along by the crowd.
Our own values and ideals become fuzzy and tainted; our resolve is destabilized.

It's hard to resist when friends or associates start speaking brashly. Caught
off guard when our associates broach ignoble subjects, we are swept along by the
social momentum. It is the nature of conversation that its multiple meanings,
innuendos, and personal motivations move along at such a fast clip, they can
instantly shift into unwholesome directions, sullying everyone involved. So until
wise sentiments are fixed into your as if they were instinct and you have thus
acquired some power of self-defense, choose your associations with care and
monitor the thrust of the conversations in which you find yourself.
%
Forgive Over And Over And Over
------------------------------

Generally, we're all doing the best we can.

When someone speaks to you curtly, disregards what you say, performs what seems
to be a thoughtless gesture or even an outright evil act, think to yourself, "If
I were that person and had endured the same trials, borne the same heartbreaks,
had the same parents, and so on, I probably would have done or said the same
thing." We are not privy to the stories behind people's actions, so we should be
patient with others and suspend our judgment of them, recognizing the limits of
our understanding. This does not mean we condone evil deeds or endorse the idea
that different actions carry the same moral weight.

When people do not act as you would wish them to, exercise the muscles of your
good nature by shrugging your shoulders and saying to yourself "Oh well." Then
let the incident go.

Try, also, to be as kind to yourself as possible. do not measure yourself
against others or even against your ideal self. Human betterment is a gradual,
two-steps-forward, one-step-back effort.

Forgive others for their misdeeds over and over again. This gesture fosters
inner ease.

Forgive yourself over and over and over again. Then try to do better next time.
%
The Virtuous Are Consistent
---------------------------

To live a life of virtue, you have to become consistent, even when it isn't
conceivable, comfortable, or easy.

It is incumbent that your thoughts, words, and deeds match up. This is a higher
standard than that help by the mob. Most people want to be good and try somewhat
to be good, but then a moral challenge presents itself and lassitude sets in.

When your thoughts, words, and deeds form a seamless fabric, you streamline your
efforts and thus eliminate worry and dread. In this way, it is easier to seek
goodness than to conduct yourself in a haphazard fashion or according to the
feelings of the moment.

When you free yourself of the distractions of shallow or illusory pleasures and
devote yourself instead to your rightful duties, you can relax. When you know
you've done the best you can under the circumstances, you can have a light
heart. Your mind doesn't have to moonlight, making excuses, thinking up alibis,
defending your honor, feeling guilty or remorseful. You can simply, cleanly,
move on to the next thing.

It's so simple really: If you say you're going to do something, do it. If you
start something, finish it.
%
Trust Your Moral Intuitions
---------------------------

We are born into essential goodness, endowed with natural intuitions about what
is good and worthy and what is not. This endemic moral capacity must then be
trained deliberately and systematically to bring out its best in full maturity.

It is natural to want to be well-regarded by others, but you must gradually wean
yourself from such dependence on the admiration or honor given or withheld by
others. In good fortune or adversity, it is the good will with which you perform
deeds that matters—not the outcome. So take your attention off of what you think
other people think and off of the results of your actions. Defer instead to your
original moral intuitions and follow them.
%
Don't Be Angry At Wrongdoers
----------------------------

The untrained response to robbers and thugs and to those who otherwise err is
outrage and retribution. Wrongdoers need to be rightly understood to form the
correct response to their behavior.

The appropriate response to bad deeds is pity for the perpetrators, since they
have adopted unsound beliefs and are deprived of the most valuable human
capacity: the ability to differentiate between what's truly good and bad for
them. Their original moral intuitions have been distorted, so they have no
chance at inner security.

Whenever someone does something foolish, pity him rather than yield to hatred
and anger as so many do.

We are only enraged at the foolish because we make idols of those things which
such people take from us.
%
The Only Prosperous Life Is The Virtuous Life
---------------------------------------------

Virtue is our aim and purpose. The virtue that leads to enduring happiness is
not a quid pro quo goodness. (I'll be good "in order to" get something.)
Goodness in and of itself is the practice and the reward.

Goodness isn't ostentatious piety or showy good manners. It's a lifelong series
of subtle readjusting of our character. We fine-tune our thoughts, words, and
deeds in a progressively wholesome direction. The virtue inheres in our
intentions and our deeds, not in the results.

Why should we bother being good? To be good is to be happy; to be tranquil and
worry-free. When you actively engage in gradually refining yourself, you retreat
from your lazy ways of covering yourself or making excuses. Instead of feeling a
persistent current of low-level shame, you move forward by using the creative
possibilities of this moment, your current situation. You begin to fully inhabit
this moment, instead of seeking escape or wishing that what is going on were
otherwise. You move through your life by being thoroughly in it.

The virtuous life holds these as treasures: your own right action, your
fidelity, honor, and decency.

Virtue is not a matter of degree, but an absolute.
%
Pursue The Good Ardently
------------------------

Pursue the good ardently. But if your efforts fall short, accept the result and
move on.
%
What Is Important And What Isn't
--------------------------------

This is our predicament: Over and over again, we lose sight of what is important
and what isn't.

We crave things over which we have no control, and are not satisfied by the
things within our control.

We need to regularly stop and take stock; to sit down and determine within
ourselves which things are worth valuing and which things are not; which risks
are worth the cost and which are not. Even the most confusing or hurtful aspects
of life can be made more tolerable by clear seeing and by choice.
%
Reason Is Supreme
-----------------

Rationality isn't everything. There are many domains of life to which it lacks
access. The greatest mysteries of existence exceed its reach. Still our reason
is the best faculty we have to safeguard our integrity.

Most people do not understand the correct use of arguments by inference and the
proper use of logical forms, so they conduct themselves in a random, overly
reactive, or muddled fashion and are easily misled.

Clear thinking is not a bloodless art. Reason's job is to critically test our
conjectures, both our interpretations and our method of arriving at them. Reason
is not an end by an indispensable instrument.

Questions are the engines of reason. Thus you need to learn how to frame
questions sensibly, rather than emotionally. If your ability to think clearly is
compromised, your moral life can become fuzzy and equivocal.

Reason can distinguish error from truth and a deep truth from a petty one. The
marks of good reasoning are clarity, consistency, rigor, precision of
definitions, and avoidance of ambiguity.

Hasten to your training in clear thinking so you can confidently enter a complex
argument and not be thrown by it.
%
Learn To Heal Yourself
----------------------

Your relentless pursuit of wisdom postpones your actually possessing it. Quit
chasing after tonics and new teachers. The latest fashionable sage or book or
diet or belief doesn't move you in the direction of a flourishing life. You do.
Renounce externals once and for all.

Practice self-sufficiency. Don't remain a dependent, malleable patient: Become
your own soul's doctor.
%
Stay The Course, In Good Weather And Bad
----------------------------------------

Regardless of what is going on around you, make the best of what is in your
power, and take the rest as it occurs.
%
Be Grateful
-----------

Practice having a grateful attitude and you will be happy. If you take a broad
view of what befalls each person and appreciate the usefulness of things that
happen, it is natural to give thanks to the Ultimate for everything that happens
in the world.
%
Never Casually Discuss Important Matters
----------------------------------------

Take care not to casually discuss matters that are of great importance to you
with people who are not important to you. Your affairs will become drained of
preciousness. You undercut your own purposes when you do this. This is
especially dangerous when you are in the early stages of an undertaking.

Other people feast like vultures on our ideas. They take it upon themselves to
blithely interpret, judge, and twist what matters most to you, and your heart
sinks. Let your ideas and plans incubate before you parade them in front of the
naysayers and trivializers.

Most people only know how to respond to an idea by pouncing on its shortfalls
rather than identifying its potential merits. Practice self-containment so that
your enthusiasm won't be frittered away.
%
What Makes Us Truly Happy
-------------------------

All human beings seek the happy life, but many confuse the means—for example,
wealth and status—with that life itself. This misguided focus on the means to a
good life makes people get further from the happy life. The really worthwhile
things are virtuous activities that make up the happy life, not the external
means that may seem to produce it.
%
The Power Of Habit
------------------

Every habit and faculty is preserved and increased by its corresponding actions:
The habit of walking makes us better walkers, regular running makes us better
runners. It is the same regarding mattes of the soul. Whenever you are angry,
you increase your anger; you have increased a habit and added fuel to a fire.

If you don't want an angry temper, then don't feed the habit. Give it nothing to
help its increase. Be quiet at first and reckon the days in which you have not
been angry. "I used to be angry every day; no every other ay; then every third
and fourth day." As time goes on, the habit is first weakened and is then
eventually overridden by a wiser response.
%
Caretake This Moment
--------------------

Caretake this moment.

Immerse yourself in its particulars. Respond to this person, this challenge,
this deed.

Quit the evasions. Stop giving yourself needless trouble.

It is time to really live; to fully inhabit the situation you happen to be in
now. You are not some disinterested bystander. Participate. Exert yourself.

Respect your partnership with providence. Ask yourself often, How may I perform
this particular deed such that it would be consistent with and acceptable to the
divine will? Heed the answer and get to work.

When your doors are shut and your room is dark, you are not alone. The will of
nature is within you as your natural genius is within. Listen to its
importunings. Follow its directives.

As concerns the art of living, the material is your own life. No great thing is
created suddenly. There must be time.

Give your best and always be kind.
%
