How long are you going to wait before you demand the best for yourself and in
no instance bypass the discriminations of reason? You have been given the
principles that you ought to endorse, and you have endorsed them. What kind of
teacher, then, are you still waiting for in order to refer your
self-improvement to him? You are no longer a boy, but a full-grown man.
If you are careless and lazy now and keep putting things off and always
deferring the day after which you will attend to yourself, you will not notice
that you are making no progress, but you will live and die as someone quite
ordinary.

From now on, then, resolve to live as a grown-up who is making progress, and
make whatever you think best a law that you never set aside. And whenever you
encounter anything that is difficult or pleasurable, or highly or lowly
regarded, remember that the contest is now: you are at the Olympic Games, you
cannot wait any longer, and that your progress is wrecked or preserved by a
single day and a single event. That is how Socrates fulfilled himself by
attending to nothing except reason in everything he encountered. And you,
although you are not yet a Socrates, should live as someone who at least wants
to be a Socrates.

-- Epictetus
%
Courage is not the absence of fear, but rather the assessment that something
else is more important than fear.

-- Franklin D. Roosevelt
%
When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a stonecutter hammering away at
his rock, perhaps a hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it. Yet
at the hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I know it was not that
last blow that did it, but all that had gone before.

-- Jacob A. Riis
%
Always meet your commitments. Do more than is expected of you. Do things faster
than expected. Achieve better results than expected. Do all of the above with
integrity and with little fanfare.

-- Mark Divine, Unbeatable Mind
%
And I urge you to please notice when you are happy, and exclaim or murmur or 
think at some point, 'If this isn't nice, I don't know what is.'

-- Kurt Vonnegut, A Man Without a Country
%
Whatever it is you're seeking won't come in the form you're expecting.

-- Haruki Murakami
%
An emerald shines even if it's worth is not spoken of. 

-- Marcus Aurelius
%
I can accept failure, everyone fails at something. But I can't accept not 
trying.

-- Michael Jordan
%
Inspiration exists, but it has to find you working.

-- Pablo Picasso
%
Drink from the well of yourself and begin again.

-- Charles Bukowski
%
You can't get much done in life if you only work on the days when you feel good.

-- Jerry West
%
Employ your time in improving yourself by other men's writings that you 
shall come easily by what others have labored hard for.

-- Socrates
%
If you do not attain happiness, always remember that you are on the right road,
and try not to leave it. Above all, avoid falsehood, every kind of falsehood,
especially falseness to yourself. Watch over your own deceitfulness and look
into it every hour, every minute. Avoid being scornful, both to others and to
yourself. What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of
your observing it in yourself. Avoid fear, too, though fear is only the
consequence of every sort of falsehood. Never be frightened at your own faint-
heartedness in attaining love. Don't be frightened overmuch even at your evil
actions. I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you, for love in action
is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams. Love in dreams is
greedy for immediate action, rapidly performed and in the sight of all. Men will
even give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long but is soon over,
with all looking on and applauding as though on the stage. But active love is
labour and fortitude, and for some people too, perhaps, a complete science.

-- Fyodor Dostoyevsky, The Brothers Karamazov
%
Forget everything else. Keep hold of this alone and remember it: Each one of us 
lives only now, this brief instant. The rest has been lived already, or is 
impossible to see. The span we live is small - small as the corner of the earth
in which we live it. Small as even the greatest renown, passed from mouth to 
mouth by short-lived stick figures, ignorant alike of themselves and those long 
dead.

-- Marcus Aurelius
%
When we love, we always strive to become better than we are. When we strive to 
become better than we are, everything around us becomes better too.

-- Paulo Coehlo, The Alchemist 
%
"My heart is afraid that it will have to suffer," the boy told the alchemist 
one night as they looked up at the moonless sky.

"Tell your heart that the fear of suffering is worse than the suffering itself.
And that no heart has ever suffered when it goes in search of its dreams,
because every second of the search is a second's encounter with God and with
eternity." 

"Every second of the search is an encounter with God," the boy told his heart. 
"When I have been truly searching for my treasure, every day has been luminous, 
because I've known that every hour was a part of the dream that I would find it.
When I have been truly searching for my treasure, I've discovered things along
the way that I never would have seen had I not had the courage to try things 
that seemed impossible for a shepherd to achieve." 

So his heart was quiet for an entire afternoon. That night, the boy slept
deeply,  and, when he awoke, his heart began to tell him things that came from
the Soul of the World. It said that all people who are happy have God within
them. And that happiness could be found in a grain of sand from the desert, as
the  alchemist had said. Because a grain of sand is a moment of creation, and
the  universe has taken millions of years to create it. "Everyone on earth has a
treasure that awaits him," his heart said. "We, people's hearts, seldom say
much about those treasures, because people no longer whant to go in search of
them. We speak of them only to children. Later, we simply let life proceed, in
its own direction, toward its own fate. But, unfortunately, very few follow the
path laid out for them - the path to their Personal Legends, and to happiness.
Most people see the world as a threatening place, and, because they do, the
world turns out, indeed, to be a threatening place. "So, we, their hearts,
speak more and more softly. We never stop speaking out, but we begin to hope
that our words won't be heard: we don't want people to suffer because they don't
follow their hearts." "why don't people's hearts tell them to continue to
follow their dreams?" the boy asked the alchemist. "Because that's what makes
the heart suffer most, and hearts don't like to suffer." From then on, the boy
understood his heart. He asked it, please, never stop speaking to him. He asked
that, when he wandered far from his dreams, his heart press him and sound the
alarm. The boy swore that, every time he heard the alarm, he would heed its
message. That night, he told all of this to the alchemist. And the alchemist
understood that the boy's heart had returned to the Soul of the World.

-- Paulo Coehlo, The Alchemist 
%
When you get into a tight place and everything goes against you until it seems
that you cannot hold on for a minute longer, never give up then, for that is
just the place and time when the tide will turn.

-- Harriet Beecher Stowe
%
Opportunity is missed by most people because it is dressed in overalls and 
looks like work.

-- Thomas A. Edison 
%
I hated every minute of training, but I said, 'Don't quit. Suffer now and live
the rest of your life as a champion'.

-- Muhammad Ali
%
To achieve great things, two things are needed: a plan and not quite enough 
time.

-- Leonard Bernstein
%
Spectacular achievement is always preceded by unspectacular preparation. 

-- Robert H. Schuller
%
Give me six hours to chop down a tree and I will spend the first four 
sharpening the axe.

-- Abraham Lincoln
%
What if I told you 10 years from now your life would be exactly the same? 
Doubt you'd be happy.

So, why are you afraid of change?

-- Karen Salmansohn
%
A bird sitting on a tree is never afraid of the branch breaking, because her 
trust is not on the branch but on it’s wings. Always believe in yourself.
%
If you're going through hell, keep going.

-- Winston Churchill
%
Giving up on your goal because of one setback is like slashing your other 
three tires because you got one flat.
%
The feelings that hurt most, the emotions that sting most, are those that are
absurd - The longing for impossible things, precisely because they are 
impossible; nostalgia for what never was; the desire for what could have been;
regret over not being someone else; dissatisfaction with the world's existence.
All these half-tones of the soul's consciousness create in us a painful 
landscape, an eternal sunset of what we are.
%
It is only through labor and painful effort, by grim energy and resolute 
courage, that we move on to better things.

-- Theodore Roosevelt
%
We can complain because rose bushes have thorns, or rejoice because thorn 
bushes have roses.

-- Abraham Lincoln
%
The sooner you step away from your comfort zone, the sooner you'll realize that
it wasn't really all that comfortable.
%
